---
layout: post
title: "Why Should We Care About 3D Printing?"
date: 2025-02-25
categories: [technology, future]
tags: [featured]
cover-img: /assets/img/pexels-jakubzerdzicki-19124461.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/pexels-jakubzerdzicki-19124461.jpg
share-img: /assets/img/pexels-jakubzerdzicki-19124461.jpg
---

*This article was written for my school newsletter.*

3D printing is, to say the least, severely underrated by the general public in not only in its rich history and integration into innovations around the world, but also in its potential in helping us build a sustainable society. “Revolutionary” is far from a befitting way to describe a technology that can pervade every aspect of our lives if implemented. However, before we discuss potential, let’s discuss the history of 3D printing and what unbeknownst milestones it’s achieved...

We start in the 1800s, which sounds perplexing—surely a technology such as 3D printing was an anachronism in that era? However, the wishful thinking of French “photo sculptor” François Willème in 1859 led to the first demonstration of scanning an object in three rather than the traditional two dimensions. Using 24 cameras simultaneously photographing a single subject, he created a rough 3D scan of the subject.

Soon after, in 1892, Joseph E. Blanther was awarded a patent for a technology he developed for creating 3D topographical maps using a layering method—a concept still used in 3D printers today!

However, the very first attempt at 3D printing occurred in 1980 when most of us were still mesmerised by our dull, regular old printers. It was Dr Hideo Kodama of the Nagoya Municipal Industrial Research Institute in May 1980 who filed a patent for what he described as a “photopolymer rapid prototyping system.” In essence, using a vat of photopolymer material, Kodama’s machine could harden the material by exposing it to UV light. This idea was never commercialised, but just 6 years later—building on the stifled work of Joseph E. Blanther—Chuck Hull invented stereolithography apparatus (SLA), a 3D printing technique where objects are built layer by layer by linking chains of molecules to form polymers in different shapes. Soon after, the world’s first commercial 3D printing system, SLA-1, was released, and the rest is history...

Many new 3D printing techniques emerged after Chuck Hull’s SLA-1, such as Carl Deckard’s use of turning loose powder into a solid object with lasers or S. Scott Crump’s method of melting polymer filaments and depositing them layer by layer. Nevertheless, 3D printing had well and truly been introduced, and industries around the world were keen to capitalise on it. Already in 1999, just over a decade after Hull’s SLA-1 systems entered the market, 3D-printed organs entered the world of medicine. Using technology developed by the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine, doctors took a CT scan of a patient’s bladder and printed a biodegradable scaffold using the information. After which, they then implanted cells from a tissue sample of the patient onto the scaffold in layers before transplanting it.

And that’s just the tip of the iceberg. In 2008, a usable prosthetic leg was created using 3D printing and continues to be used today. In 2011, engineers at the University of Southampton designed and printed the world’s first unmanned 3D-printed aircraft at a total cost of under $7,000; a standard Boeing 737—one of the world’s most popular passenger planes—costs around $100 million to produce!

At his State of the Union address in 2013, President Obama spoke about the National Additive Manufacturing Innovation Institute and how it had revitalised the hard-hit town of Youngstown, Ohio, with the potential of 3D printing technology. He gave a technology conceived in the 1800s its biggest endorsement yet:

>*“A once-shuttered warehouse is now a state-of-the art lab where new workers are mastering the 3-D printing that has the potential to revolutionize the way we make almost everything.”*
>  ― ***Barack Obama***

Now that you’ve witnessed just one facet of 3D printing’s influence on contemporary society, let’s discuss why we should implement it more: it is by far one of the best ways for us to continue to develop sustainably and avoid the repercussions of climate change.

* Compared to traditional manufacturing, 3D printing is much more efficient since it requires precisely planning the construction of an object and uses a fixed quantity of material; any 3D model can be optimised to reduce material usage.
* 3D printing material can be locally sourced, so companies don’t have to rely on external supplies from anywhere else and can produce directly within their main premises, reducing their carbon footprint.
* There’s no need for inventory as production can be done on demand, so companies will never face an excess demand or supply for construction materials.
* Eco-friendly materials are available to be used in 3D printers, such as biodegradable filaments made from corn starch, coffee grounds, sugar cane, or wheat waste, so no carbon emissions are released from sourcing materials either.
* Finally, 3D printing is much more energy efficient. For instance, 3D-printed parts in the aerospace industry are much lighter and so reduce fuel consumption significantly. 3D printers themselves can produce faster at much lower energy demands.

I could go on and on, but now there’s no need for any vindication: the amorphous future of construction, architecture, and transportation (you name it) lies in 3D printers, waiting to take shape. As a matter of fact, it already is!

Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology developed a robotic system capable of 3D printing an entire building in 2017. Yes, you heard me right. An entire building with a 50-foot-diameter and 12-foot-high dome in just 14 hours. And did I mention that it’s completely solar powered? The implications of this invention are staggering and could be used for anything from the rapid construction of emergency homes in disaster-struck areas to colonies in outer space. In case you don’t believe me, NASA is planning to carry a 3D printer with them on the upcoming Artemis missions that could make structures for the astronauts using moon regolith. A printer conceived and built on Earth using dust from our Moon to build structures—3D printing can surely no longer be perceived as a nascent technology.

There’s so much more I could talk about. A 3D printer has been released that uses recycled paper pulp to build strong and durable objects. Designers in the Netherlands made the world’s first 3D-printed stainless-steel bridge and installed it over one of Amsterdam’s oldest canals using six-axis robots (it looks like we already have multi-axis 3D printing technology!). The city of Eindhoven in the Netherlands is currently underway with the world’s first commercial housing project with homes 3D printed entirely at the Eindhoven University of Technology. In just 45 years after Chuck Hull released the SLA-1, 3D printing has traversed the gap from wishful thinking to our guiding light on the road to a better, more sustainable world.

We would be wise to continue to improve and develop this technology if we want to survive the growing effects of climate change and build a society that uses our resources optimally rather than wastefully. Oh, and sooner rather than later, we’ll be able to 3D print literal colonies in outer space.

I don’t know what could be cooler than that...

#### Sources
* [10 Reasons Why 3D Printing Is Considered Sustainable - 3Dnatives](https://www.3dnatives.com/en/10-reasons-why-3d-printing-is-considered-sustainable-300720244/#!)
* [Obama’s speech highlights rise of 3-D printing - CNN Business](https://edition.cnn.com/2013/02/13/tech/innovation/obama-3d-printing/index.html)
* [The brief but building history of 3D printing - Digital Trends](https://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/history-of-3d-printing-milestones/)

*Authored by Idris Shamsi in 2025*
